# AI in Science
## Summary
Production of knowledge, particularly scientific research, is a crucial driver of innovation and economic growth. The link between scientific advancements, innovation, and firm performance is well recognized in strategy literature (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Fleming & Sorenson, 2004). As such, understanding the process and direction of scientific research and their determining factors is of great importance and interest in the field (Wuchty, Jones & Uzzi, 2007; Bikard, Murray & Gans, 2015; Wu, Wang, & Evans, 2019; Park, Leahey & Funk,2023).
Among these factors, technological change has long been recognized as a significant force shaping the landscape of scientific research. New technologies have the potential to change the nature of scientific research by providing novel and enhanced methodologies for inquiry and transforming how research is organized (Griliches, 1957; Cockburn, Henderson & Stern, 2019). Historically, technological advancements such as the advent of the microscope (Gest, 2004), gene sequencing (Heather & Chain, 2016) and information technology (Ding et al., 2010) enabled enhanced productivity and novel discoveries in scientific research. Most recently, artificial intelligence (AI) is being seen as the next big technology to transform the practice of scientific research.
AI represents one of the most significant technological changes of our time. Over the last decade, AI has demonstrated remarkable capabilities, from beating the world champion at the game of Go (AlphaGo, 2016), to solving the protein folding problem (AlphaFold, 2020), and exhibiting human-like language capabilities (ChatGPT, 2022). Most recently, AI achieved near-human levels of performance in complex cognitive tasks, including Google DeepMind’s success at the 2024 International Math Olympiad (DeepMind, 2024). Given the history of groundbreaking technologies driving scientific progress, AI’s ability to tackle complex problems suggests that it, too, will play a pivotal role in scientific discovery. Researchers across fields are already integrating AI into their work (Bhardwaj, Kishore & Pandey, 2022; Wang et al., 2023), amplifying expectations for the future.
Despite the increasing integration of AI in the process of scientific discovery, its effects on research outcomes, processes, and implications for researchers remain underexplored. Understanding whether and how AI affects the performance and productivity of scientific research and what the implication for the researchers is an important question to be answered in the literature on the management of science and innovation. Not only would AI affect the pace and direction of scientific advancements, but it also has the potential to change the nature of the process and organization of innovative activities (Agrawal, McHale & Oettl, 2024; Cockburn, Henderson & Stern, 2019). Such changes could have important implications on firms’ innovation strategy as they strive to identify, acquire, and utilize the right type of resources suitable for AI-driven innovation.
A key question in this regard is whether AI affects the research productivity of scientists, and if so, whether the effects are heterogeneous depending on researcher characteristics such as skill or experience. While several studies examine AI's impact on task performance outside the context of science (Brynjolfsson, Li & Raymond, 2023; Peng, Kalliamvakou, Cihon & Demirer, 2023; Noy & Zhang, 2023; Doshi & Hauser, 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023, Kanazawa, Kawaguchi, Shigeoka & Watanabe, 2022), most studies are set on relatively simple, routine tasks where AI can provide a reliable, high-quality solution. Given AI's varied capabilities across domains (Dell’Acqua et al., 2023) and the complexity of scientific research, its impact on scientific research may differ from simpler contexts and requires further investigation.
This paper explores how adoption of AI in research affects the productivity of individual researchers. Specifically, I focus on the use of AlphaFold, a deep-learning AI system developed by Google DeepMind for protein 3D structure prediction (Jumper et al., 2021a), tracking its impact on the publication records of life scientists who incorporate this tool into their research. I explore the question of whether AI benefits highly experienced or inexperienced researchers more in terms of research productivity. My results suggest that AlphaFold plays a leveling role in scientific research, benefitting researchers with lower experience and productivity more than highly experienced researchers.

## References
Agrawal, A., McHale, J., & Oettl, A. (2024). Artificial intelligence and scientific discovery: A model of prioritized search. Research Policy, 53(5), 104989.
Al-Janabi, A. (2022). Has DeepMind's AlphaFold solved the protein folding problem?.
Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A., & Hodson, J. (2024). Artificial intelligence, firm growth, and product innovation. Journal of Financial Economics, 151, 103745.
Bhardwaj, A., Kishore, S., & Pandey, D. K. (2022). Artificial intelligence in biological sciences. Life, 12(9), 1430.
Bianchini, S., Müller, M., & Pelletier, P. (2022). Artificial intelligence in science: An emerging general method of invention. Research Policy, 51(10), 104604.
Bikard, M., Murray, F., & Gans, J. S. (2015). Exploring trade-offs in the organization of scientific work: Collaboration and scientific reward. Management science, 61(7), 1473-1495.
Brynjolfsson, E., Li, D., & Raymond, L. R. (2023). Generative AI at work (No. w31161). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Callaway, B., & Sant’Anna, P. H. (2021). Difference-in-differences with multiple time periods. Journal of econometrics, 225(2), 200-230.
Carpenter, C. R., Cone, D. C., & Sarli, C. C. (2014). Using publication metrics to highlight academic productivity and research impact. Academic emergency medicine, 21(10), 1160-1172.
Clarivate (2023). 2023 Journal Impact Factor, Journal Citation Reports
Cockburn, I. M., Henderson, R., & Stern, S. (2019). 4. The impact of artificial intelligence on innovation: An exploratory analysis. In The economics of artificial intelligence (pp. 115-148). University of Chicago Press.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innovation. Administrative science quarterly, 35(1), 128-152.
Czarnitzki, D., Fernández, G. P., & Rammer, C. (2023). Artificial intelligence and firm-level productivity. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 211, 188-205.
Damioli, G., Van Roy, V., & Vertesy, D. (2021). The impact of artificial intelligence on labor productivity. Eurasian Business Review, 11, 1-25.
De Chaisemartin, C., & d’Haultfoeuille, X. (2020). Two-way fixed effects estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects. American economic review, 110(9), 2964-2996.
DeepMind. (2024, July 25). AI achieves silver-medal standard solving International Mathematical Olympiad problems. DeepMind. https://deepmind.google/discover/blog/ai-solves-imo-problems-at-silver-medal-level/
Dell'Acqua, F., McFowland III, E., Mollick, E. R., Lifshitz-Assaf, H., Kellogg, K., Rajendran, S., ... & Lakhani, K. R. (2023). Navigating the jagged technological frontier: Field experimental evidence of the effects of AI on knowledge worker productivity and quality. Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit Working Paper, (24-013).
Dill, K. A., & MacCallum, J. L. (2012). The protein-folding problem, 50 years on. science, 338(6110), 1042-1046.
Ding, W. W., Levin, S. G., Stephan, P. E., & Winkler, A. E. (2010). The impact of information technology on academic scientists' productivity and collaboration patterns. Management Science, 56(9), 1439-1461.
Doshi, A. R., & Hauser, O. (2023). Generative artificial intelligence enhances creativity. Available at SSRN.
Fleming, L., & Sorenson, O. (2004). Science as a map in technological search. Strategic management journal, 25(8‐9), 909-928.
Gest, H. (2004). The discovery of microorganisms by Robert Hooke and Antoni Van Leeuwenhoek, fellows of the Royal Society. Notes and records of the Royal Society of London, 58(2), 187-201.
Griliches, Z. (1957). Hybrid corn: An exploration in economics of technological change (Doctoral dissertation, The University of Chicago).
Heather, J. M., & Chain, B. (2016). The sequence of sequencers: The history of sequencing DNA. Genomics, 107(1), 1-8.
Jia, N., Luo, X., Fang, Z., & Liao, C. (2024). When and how artificial intelligence augments employee creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 67(1), 5-32.
Johnson, P. C., Laurell, C., Ots, M., & Sandström, C. (2022). Digital innovation and the effects of artificial intelligence on firms’ research and development–Automation or augmentation, exploration or exploitation?. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 179, 121636.
Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O., ... & Hassabis, D. (2021). Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. nature, 596(7873), 583-589.
Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger, O., ... & Hassabis, D. (2021). Applying and improving AlphaFold at CASP14. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 89(12), 1711-1721.
Kanazawa, K., Kawaguchi, D., Shigeoka, H., & Watanabe, Y. (2022). AI, skill, and productivity: The case of taxi drivers (No. w30612). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Klein, E. (2023, July 11). Opinion | A.I. Could Solve Some of Humanity’s Hardest Problems. It Already Has. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/07/11/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-demis-hassabis.html
Liu, J., Chang, H., Forrest, J. Y. L., & Yang, B. (2020). Influence of artificial intelligence on technological innovation: Evidence from the panel data of china's manufacturing sectors. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 158, 120142.
Liu, B., He, H., Luo, H., Zhang, T., & Jiang, J. (2019). Artificial intelligence and big data facilitated targeted drug discovery. Stroke and vascular neurology, 4(4).
McKiernan, E. C., Schimanski, L. A., Muñoz Nieves, C., Matthias, L., Niles, M. T., & Alperin, J. P. (2019). Use of the Journal Impact Factor in academic review, promotion, and tenure evaluations. elife, 8, e47338.
Nickerson, J. A., & Zenger, T. R. (2004). A knowledge-based theory of the firm—The problem-solving perspective. Organization science, 15(6), 617-632.
Noy, S., & Zhang, W. (2023). Experimental evidence on the productivity effects of generative artificial intelligence. Science, 381(6654), 187-192.
Park, M., Leahey, E., & Funk, R. J. (2023). Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time. Nature, 613(7942), 138-144.
Peng, S., Kalliamvakou, E., Cihon, P., & Demirer, M. (2023). The impact of ai on developer productivity: Evidence from github copilot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06590.
Priem, J., Piwowar, H., & Orr, R. (2022). OpenAlex: A fully-open index of scholarly works, authors, venues, institutions, and concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01833.
Rammer, C., Fernández, G. P., & Czarnitzki, D. (2022). Artificial intelligence and industrial innovation: Evidence from German firm-level data. Research Policy, 51(7), 104555.
Seamans, R., & Raj, M. (2018). AI, labor, productivity and the need for firm-level data (No. w24239). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Seglen, P. O. (1997). Why the impact factor of journals should not be used for evaluating research. Bmj, 314(7079), 497.
Sorenson, O., Rivkin, J. W., & Fleming, L. (2006). Complexity, networks and knowledge flow. Research policy, 35(7), 994-1017.
Tregoning, J. (2018). How will you judge me if not by impact factor?. Nature, 558(7710), 345-346.
Varadi, M., Bertoni, D., Magana, P., Paramval, U., Pidruchna, I., Radhakrishnan, M., ... & 
Wang, H., Fu, T., Du, Y., Gao, W., Huang, K., Liu, Z., ... & Zitnik, M. (2023). Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature, 620(7972), 47-60.
Virshup, A. M., Contreras-García, J., Wipf, P., Yang, W., & Beratan, D. N. (2013). Stochastic voyages into uncharted chemical space produce a representative library of all possible drug-like compounds. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 135(19), 7296-7303.
Wu, L., Wang, D., & Evans, J. A. (2019). Large teams develop and small teams disrupt science and technology. Nature, 566(7744), 378-382.
Wuchty, S., Jones, B. F., & Uzzi, B. (2007). The increasing dominance of teams in production of knowledge. Science, 316(5827), 1036-1039.
